Gradus ad Parnassum
Definitions
I. Unison, third, fifth, sixth, octave, and the intervals made up of 
these and the octaves are consonants.
II. The unison, fifth, and octave are perfect, the third and sixth 
imperfect.
III. The remaining intervals are dissonances.
IV. Direct motion results when two or more parts ascend or descend in the 
same direction by step or skip.
V. Contrary motion results when one part ascends while the other descends.
VI. Oblique motion results when one part moves while the other is 
stationary.
XX. The first species is a composition of two or more voices having notes 
of the same length and consisting only of consoances.
Rules
VII. From a consonance to a perfect consonance one must not use direct 
motion.
VIII. The end and beginning must be perfect consonances.
IX. In the next to last bar, there must be a major sixth if the cantus 
firmus is in the lower part and a minor third if it is in the upper part.
X. The counterpoint must be in the same mode as the cantus firmus.
XI. A skip by an augmented fourth (tritone) is prohibited.
XII. The tritone is to be avoided when reached stepwise if the line is not 
continued stepwise in the same direction in one part.
XIII. Use more imperfect than perfect consonances.
XIV. Use more contrary and oblique motion than direct motion.
XV. A skip of a major sixth is prohibited.
XV. In the first species, a unison is to be avoided except at the 
beginning or the end.
XVI. In the second species, each measure consists of two equal parts, the 
first of which is the downbeat and the second the upbeat. Two half-notes 
are set against a whole note.
XVII. The downbeat must be consonant.
XVIII. The upbeat may be dissonant if it moves from preceding note and to 
the following in stepwise motion.
XIX. A dissonance may only occur by diminution (by filling the note between
two notes that are a third apart).
XX. In the next to last measure, if the cantus firmus is below, there 
should be a fifth followed by a major sixth. If it is above, there should 
be a fifth followed by a minor third.
XXI. The skip of a third on the upbeat cannot prevent a succession of 
fifths or octaves.
XXII. One may use a half-rest in the place of the first note.
XXIII. If it is not possible to use contrary motion, one may take the 
skip of a minor sixth or an octave. (Redundant?)
XXIV. In ternary time, the middle of three notes in a bar may be dissonant;
otherwise all notes are consonant.
- Third species
Four quarter notes against a whole note.
If five quarter notes ascend or descend stepwise, the second and fourth 
notes are dissonant.
If the second and fourth notes are consonant, the third may be dissonant 
by diminution.
Nota cambiata. One may go from a dissonant second note to a consonant by 
step in the same direction
